---
layout: post
title: Thank You for Wearing a Mask Over Your Nose and Mouth
excerpt: As I write this post on 9/19/2021, new cases are trending upward there are nine available ICU beds in the state of Idaho.
author: Tim
---

[Face Masks: Much More Than You Wanted To Know](https://web.archive.org/web/20200619074339/https://slatestarcodex.com/2020/03/23/face-masks-much-more-than-you-wanted-to-know/) - Slate Star Codex  
> Please don’t buy up masks while there is a shortage and healthcare workers don’t have enough.  
> If the shortage ends, and wearing a mask is cost-free, I agree with the guidelines from China, Hong Kong, and Japan – consider wearing a mask in high-risk situations like subways or crowded buildings. Wearing masks will not make you invincible, and if you risk compensate even a little it might do more harm than good. Realistically you should be avoiding high-risk situations like subways and crowded buildings as much as you possibly can. But if you have to go in them, yes, most likely a mask will help.  
> In low-risk situations, like being at home or taking a walk, I mean sure, a mask might make you 0.0001% (or whatever) less likely to get infected. If that’s worth it to you, consider the possibility that you might be freaking out a little too much about this whole pandemic thing. If it’s still worth it, go for it.

[Idaho Covid Dashboard](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/idaho.division.of.public.health/viz/DPHIdahoCOVID-19Dashboard/Home)  
As I write this post on 9/19/2021, new cases are trending upward there are nine available ICU beds in the state of Idaho.

[The Impact of Community Masking on COVID-19: A Cluster-Randomized Trial in Bangladesh](../../../papers/Mask_RCT____Symptomatic_Seropositivity_083121.pdf)  
> A randomized-trial of community-level mask promotion in rural Bangladesh during COVID-19 shows that the intervention tripled mask usage and reduced symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections, demonstrating that promoting community mask-wearing can improve public health.

[Visualizing Speech-Generated Oral Fluid Droplets with Laser Light Scattering](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc2007800) - New England Journal of Medicine  
